In the end it was a pummelling, but Ireland had to put in plenty of hard graft and tackles before decorating the game with a salvo of three converted tries in the last 10 minutes. With that it had become a rout, thoroughly eclipsing the previous Irish record win over the Springboks, by 32-15 here in 2006.

Thus, it could be interpreted as somewhat flattering, but then again it's funny how superior teams often only reap their rewards in the final quarter. For all the relatively callow look of the Irish bench, they also made a huge impact, noticeably more so than their reasonably hyped counterparts, and typified by try scorer Rhys Ruddock.

It's been a long time since the Aviva Stadium had been soaked in this manner, and Ireland did muddle around a tad. In truth, they hadn't created a huge amount until that final quarter, but they were altogether more accurate with the greasy pill than the profligate Springboks.

Indeed, vastly better coached, Ireland looked like the team that had been together for nine matches and four months, and the Boks like they hadn't played in that time, even though it was the other way around.

Ireland's set-pieces and especially their collective discipline was also significantly better, while their breakdown work - across the team, whether it was Cian Healy or Rob Kearney hitting the ruck - was typically efficient too.

The home side looked fitter as well as fresher, and huge, hard-working games abounded, be it Tadhg Furlong, Iain Henderson, Sean O'Brien or CJ Stander. Conor Murray and man of the match Johnny Sexton, as they do, did almost everything right and little wrong, and on debut Bundee Aki brought enormous enthusiasm and energy - just witness his 17 tackles.

There were first Irish tries for Andrew Conway, on his full home debut, Rob Herring and Jacob Stockdale, on an eye-catching home debut. Darren Sweetnam also made his first appearance in an Irish shirt.

Having reverted more to type in their recent redemption mission against the All Blacks, the Springboks' gameplan was predicated on getting their big straight runners over the gain line. Ireland's response was to push up quickly and make their tackles, and as they were quite competitive at the breakdown this left the ‘Boks playing mostly off slow or static possession.

Even when they did go through the phases and create space out wide, their decision-making or handling usually let them down, whether it was Damien de Allende aimlessly kicking the ball away or Elton Jantjies and Siya Kolisi passing poorly to winger Courtnail Skosan, who also endured something of a torrid might under Conor Murray's aerial bombardment and the chasing and aerial pressure of Andrew Conway.

There was little or nothing of an offloading game, or tip-on passes, from the Boks to keep the Irish defenders guessing.

With the Boks needing two converted tries to draw level and 12 minutes remaining, they used up almost half a minute with a maul on halfway. Go figure.

As the smoke from the pre-match pyrotechnics cleared, Jantjies kicked off long down the middle, and Sexton gathered to find touch on half-way. From the line-out, Sexton held up Coenie Oosthuizen and Bundee Aki lined him up, lifted him and drove him back in tandem with Sexton. The net effect saw the unfortunate Springbok stretchered off with what appeared a bad knee injury.

The Boks held the ball in from their ensuing put-in, perhaps seeking a penalty, but instead it was the Irish scrum who inched forward, particularly on Cian Healy's side, to earn the penalty. Sexton unerringly opened the scoring from about 43 metres.

South Africa were mostly content to kick, and when they didn't their handling hurt them, an example being a wounded duck of a pass by Jantjies. Sexton kept the scoreboard ticking with two penalties at the breakdown, first against Lood de Jager for not rolling away, then against Siya Kolise for breaching the new amendment for kicking ruck ball. It looked a tough call, all the more so as referee Ben O'Keefe appeared to signal the ball was out.
