WHEN STEPHEN DONNELLY MET BORIS JOHNSON AND OTHER STORIES

A delegation from Leinster House on a friendship visit to London this week held a number of meetings with their Westminster counterparts, including controversial British foreign secretary Boris Johnson. The visiting TDs and Senators posed for a photograph with him in his Whitehall office and Boris was very chummy and charming.
Brexit was the main topic of discussion and, judging by the reaction we heard afterwards from some of the Irish visitors, BoJo didn’t exactly impress with his grasp of how serious the implications of Brexit could be for Ireland.
In the photograph, while all the other politicians are smiling for the camera, Fianna Fáil’s Brexit spokesman, Stephen Donnelly, sits stoney-faced. He would be counted among the ranks of the unimpressed.
In a curious twist, Donnelly credits Boris Johnson for being one of the reasons he went into politics. Johnson was his last client when he worked for management consultants McKinsey. His team carried out a study for the Mayor of London’s office, figuring out how to target a huge chuck of philanthropic money at disadvantaged parts of the capital. They set up a citywide volunteering scheme, which is still in operation.
While he was working in city hall, in and around politics and steering through a very positive project, he thought “this is what politics should be” and decided to come back home and see how he could make a difference.
“You are partly responsible for me being here today,” he told the foreign secretary.
Naturally, Boris was chuffed.


BREXIT: EU SAYS NORTH MUST STAY IN CUSTOMS UNION TO AVOID HARD BORDER
 
The EU is demanding Britain accept that Northern Ireland may need to remain inside the European customs union and single market after Brexit in order to avoid “a hard Border on the island of Ireland”.
The explicit mention of an “all-island” approach by Dublin and Brussels directly contradicts the UK position and will infuriate the Democratic Unionist Party, on whose votes British prime minister Theresa May’s government depends for a parliamentary majority at Westminster.
The European Commission on Wednesday circulated an update on negotiations, seen by the Financial Times, which concludes that the avoidance of “regulatory divergence” on the island of Ireland is “essential” to protect the peace process.
“It consequently seems essential for the UK to commit to ensuring that a hard Border on the island of Ireland is avoided, including by ensuring no emergence of regulatory divergence from those rules of the internal market and the customs union,” the paper states.
Minister for Foreign Affairs Simon Coveney said on Friday morning the document “crystallises our position. If the UK wants to move on to phase two of the negotiations then the question of a hard border needs to be addressed.”
He said it was encouraging that the EU’s position was in sync with the Irish Government’s. The EU position had been galvanized and he did not expect it to change, he told RTÉ’s Morning Ireland.
Mr Coveney said wanted a solution for Northern Ireland and for the UK to remain in the Customs Union.
Given the practical challenges of the UK leaving the customs union Mr Coveney has called for a transition period of up to five years after Brexit, well in excess of the 2 years suggested by London.

His Ministerial colleague Charlie Flanagan said on Friday “a hard Border flies in the face of the Good Friday Agreement” and said Government believes anything that is disruptive to the 1998 agreement “will be unacceptable in the context of the current negotiations.”
The statement comes days after Northern Ireland secretary James Brokenshire made clear that it would be “impossible” to imagine Belfast remaining within the EU’s customs union and single market, in effect creating a trade border along the Irish Sea after Brexit.
‘Leave as one UK’
“We will leave the EU in 2019 as one United Kingdom, ” Mr Brokenshire said in Brussels on Monday. “We need to ensure that nothing is done that undermines the integrity of the UK single market.” He added: “I find it difficult to image how Northern Ireland could somehow remain in while the rest of the country leaves. I find it impossible.”
The commission stance on the potential need for an all-island regulatory solution reflects the hardening position in Dublin over border issues as the Brexit divorce negotiations enter a critical phase.
One senior EU official said the Irish felt they were reaching a point of “maximum leverage” and were “really worried” by the UK position, which insists the Irish Border questions can only be fully addressed through a UK-EU trade deal.
Another negotiator involved in talks noted Ireland’s firm stance was becoming a “wild card” factor in the efforts to make “sufficient progress” in divorce talks by December so that talks on UK-EU future relations can begin.
Both Britain and the EU say they are committed to ensuring that Brexit does not undermine the 1998 Good Friday peace agreement or lead to the emergence of hard-Border infrastructure between the Republic and Northern Ireland.
Significant progress has been made in the six rounds of Brexit talks to date, including agreement on joint principles to maintain the Common Travel Area between the UK and Ireland.
But the Border issue has remained far from resolved. Sensitivities over Northern Ireland have been exacerbated by the UK government’s reliance on the DUP for its parliamentary majority and by the breakdown in Northern Ireland’s power-sharing arrangements, which have left it without an executive since January.
The DUP rejects the idea of any special arrangements after Brexit that would keep Northern Ireland within the EU’s regulatory orbit.
Dublin has long said Britain should stay in the customs union, reducing many but not all of the political and practical challenges over the Northern Ireland border.
Irish officials question the feasibility of the “invisible” Border proposed by the UK, with imports and exports being notified online.
Taoiseach Leo Varadkar said this week that he was “more optimistic” that a deal on divorce talks could be reached by the end of the year.
But he added that the ultimate decision “will, of course, all depend on what happens over the next number of weeks and what specific assurances and written guarantees we can get from the UK.” - Additional reporting: The Financial Times



IN THE LAST MONTHS OF JIM'S LIFE I SPENT A LOT OF TIME JUST SITTING WITH HIM...IT WAS THE MOST SPECIAL TIME


BEFORE JIM STYNES ever set foot in Australia, Garry Lyon had made his way to Ireland.
In 1984, Lyon was part of the Australia U17 team that travelled to play an International Rules series against Ireland. He would go on to score 426 goals in 226 AFL games for Melbourne Football Club, become the longest serving-captain in the club’s history and win more All-Australian (All-Star) honours than any other Melbourne player.
But 33 years ago, Lyon was just another skinny 16-year-old with a dream. For the majority of that U17 Australian squad, it would be their only visit to this country. He didn’t know it at the time, but it was only the beginning of a long relationship between Garry Lyon and the Irish.
“We spent five weeks there as 16 year old boys just travelling around and playing six or seven games,” he tells The42 from Melbourne. ”It was magnificent.”
That September, an 18-year-old Jim Stynes from Rathfarnham helped the Dublin minors to an All-Ireland minor football title.

Shortly after the victory, he attended a trial in Dublin for the chance to win a scholarship with Aussie Rules outfit the Melbourne Demons. By the end of the week-long camp, Stynes was offered a contract by the Demons. Two weeks later, he was sitting on a plane on his way to the other side of the world.
Within seven years, Stynes was the voted best and most dominant player in Australian Rules. But when first he landed Down Under, he couldn’t have been further away from winning a Brownlow medal.
“This weird looking, pasty skinned, fairly ugly-looking man, to be honest, arrived at training,” laughed Lyon in the 2012 documentary Every Heart Beats True.
“We watched him play footy and we thought, ‘This is the greatest joke of all-time.’ We didn’t appreciate the sort of person Jim was at that time.”
Naturally, there was a difficult bedding in period for Stynes as he settled into an almost alien culture. He wrote in his autobiography: “My accent was the subject of great mirth. I often had to repeat myself.
“I would get baffled looks when I referred to people as ‘yer man’ or ‘yer woon’ and some friends took great delight in tallying the different ways I used the term ‘bollocks’ in conversation. There was ‘a load of bollocks’ (nonsense), ‘what a bollocks’ (an idiot), ‘he’s made a bollocks of that’ (a mess) and ‘I’m bollocksed’ (tired), to list just a few.’”


Lyon agrees with Stynes’ assessment. He reckons the Melbourne U19s “thought he was a strange man when he first arrived” and they “couldn’t understand a word he said.” When he introduced himself to Stynes, Lyon told him he was from the town of Kyabram (a small town located 200km north of Melbourne).
Stynes misunderstood Lyon’s tan and thick black hair, presuming Kyabram was somewhere far away in the Australian outback. He arrived home to his boarding family that evening, and over dinner declared, ‘I met my first Australian Aborigine today.’ “I got a few laughs out of that story over the years,” Stynes wrote in his book.
“He was a little older than me,” Lyon says. “Once we advanced to senior footy, he was struggling and he couldn’t really cement his spot in the team. I wouldn’t say we were overly close (at the start).
“He had to go back and play at a lower level for Prahran (Melbourne’s VFL team) and that’s when his footy started to really blossom. He came back and by 1987 he was a part of our senior team. That’s when our friendship really kicked in.

Lyon made his Melbourne debut in 1986 and a year later Stynes arrived on the scene. They soldiered side-by-side with the Demons up until Stynes retired in 1998 and became very close friends.
“I met a lot of Jim’s good Irish mates, his closest mates. I got to spend time with them and we used to go out a bit and go drinking. Even, we were on holidays up in the islands up in Queensland and Jim was up there with one of his mates. We dropped in and surprised him one morning and it led to another big night. We had a lot of fun together.”


Lyon agrees with Stynes’ assessment. He reckons the Melbourne U19s “thought he was a strange man when he first arrived” and they “couldn’t understand a word he said.” When he introduced himself to Stynes, Lyon told him he was from the town of Kyabram (a small town located 200km north of Melbourne).
Stynes misunderstood Lyon’s tan and thick black hair, presuming Kyabram was somewhere far away in the Australian outback. He arrived home to his boarding family that evening, and over dinner declared, ‘I met my first Australian Aborigine today.’ “I got a few laughs out of that story over the years,” Stynes wrote in his book.
“He was a little older than me,” Lyon says. “Once we advanced to senior footy, he was struggling and he couldn’t really cement his spot in the team. I wouldn’t say we were overly close (at the start).
“He had to go back and play at a lower level for Prahran (Melbourne’s VFL team) and that’s when his footy started to really blossom. He came back and by 1987 he was a part of our senior team. That’s when our friendship really kicked in.
“I said many times, we didn’t always see eye-to-eye, Jimmy and I. He was pretty obstinate and pig-headed and I was probably the same so we used to clash a bit. But the older and more mature I got, the greater my understanding of him and what he stood for and his values. I just loved the man.”
Lyon made his Melbourne debut in 1986 and a year later Stynes arrived on the scene. They soldiered side-by-side with the Demons up until Stynes retired in 1998 and became very close friends.
“I met a lot of Jim’s good Irish mates, his closest mates. I got to spend time with them and we used to go out a bit and go drinking. Even, we were on holidays up in the islands up in Queensland and Jim was up there with one of his mates. We dropped in and surprised him one morning and it led to another big night. We had a lot of fun together.”

CROKE PARK, 2002
Lyon was two years retired when he was appointed Australia International Rules coach in 2001. It was a surprise to no-one that Stynes was Lyon’s right-hand man and assistant coach for the four years he led Australia.
“When they asked I jumped at it and I loved every minute,” he says.
“I had an added incentive with my history, with the whole Ireland-Australia thing with Jim and the Melbourne footy club who have been pioneers to a large degree in trying to bring players over.
“Jimmy was my best mate so to have him sitting alongside me in the coaches box was great. Travelling back to Ireland with him and getting a sense of Ireland through his eyes was really special and I look back upon those times now…they were some of my favourites times of my life now he’s not with us anymore.
“All of those things combined made the whole experience really memorable for me. I just love the way the Irish go about things as well. They’ve got a great perspective and outlook.
“I enjoyed the company of the Irish people I met, I loved seeing the players going about it, I loved talking to the press when I was over there. I just think it was one of the best things I’ve done.”
“I enjoyed the company of the Irish people I met, I loved seeing the players going about it, I loved talking to the press when I was over there. I just think it was one of the best things I’ve done.”

Lyon tells a great story of the time Stynes’ wife Sam left the former team-mates alone in the hospital while she went home to check on the kids. She gave Lyon strict instructions that her husband was to take it easy.
In the meantime, Stynes wanted to stretch his legs, so the pair went for a stroll around the ward at 2am. Along the way, they happened to stumble across a mini pool table.
Some time later, Sam returned to an empty hospital bed. She heard some shouting coming from down the corridor and walked down to find the pair having a heated argument beside the pool table.
They were arguing over whether you could shoot backwards after receiving two free shots, and neither man was giving an inch.
Stynes had come out of brain surgery just 24 hours earlier, was connected to an IV machine and had failing eyesight, but he had lost none of his competitiveness.
During those lengthy discussions in the final months, Lyon says they got to know each other on a whole new level. That’s remarkable, considering the pair were friends for 27 years by that point.
“It was the most special time,” he says. ”You don’t realise until you go through it and have those conversations, it’s a bit of a journey and you learn about yourself in the process.
“I refer back to him, you end up measuring yourself by him and who he was in terms of the way you live your life. I find myself often thinking, ‘What would Jim think about that?’ That is a pretty special thing.”
And who won that game of pool in the hospital?
“He beat me!”

Lyon remains a big fan of the series and takes an interesting view of the Irish players.
“The thing I marvelled at was the ability of those players,” he says. “I know the GAA and supporters hate it when their young players are recruited, but in terms of a recruiting ground, Ireland remains untapped.
“I mean, some of the greats come from Ireland…(Tadhg) Kennelly, Stynes, (Sean) Wight, Pearce Hanley. The strike-rate in terms of players coming and elevating themselves to elite level is pretty extraordinary I reckon.
“Marty Clarke was a star as well. I’ve seen enough of these guys to know that with full time professionalism, resources, training, nutrition and all that sort of stuff, they are all capable of making it.”